t is not surprising ... that modern criticism of "Cinderella" ... has been
so strangely indifferent to the role that Cinderell mother plays in the
story. In our post-Freudian world, Cinderell mother is imagined as
absent despite the fact that she plays a central part in the unfolding oinderell destiny. Indeed, Cinderell mothe role is far from marginal; 
the words and actions of Cinderell mother are of vital importance
in narrative sequencing and the overall "moral" of the story. The Grimms’
version of "Cinderella" opens significantly with the dying mothe injunction
to the soon-to-be-orphaned girl. On her deathbed, the mother gives
Cinderella the following advice: "Dear child, be good and pious. Them the
dear Lord shall always assist you, and I shall look down from heaven and
take care of you." In fairy tales, the opening scene is always of particular
Importance, since it is here that the tale sets forth the problem which it will
then go on to solve. Cinderell problem is precisely the fact that her

Mother has died. It is this "lack," the lack of the mother, which Cinderella
III list overcome in the course of the story. The narrative instantly complicated
her task by staging the arrival of a powerful mother and her two
daughters, who, in the strength of their unity, hope to vanquish the mother
less girl. Thus the story quickly amplifies the mother / daughter theme,
rubbing salt, if you will, in Cinderell wound. For just as Cinderell
powerlessness is a result of her mothe death, so the stepsistersssociated with their strong, scheming mother. In short order, then,
Cinderella finds herself in need of her mothe good advice, and it is
through keeping her mothe advice that she manages to overcome her
own social isolation and the plots of her enemies. In the end, Cinderella
rises to a position of power and influence, and she accomplishes this,
apparently, despite her motherless status.
But is she really motherless? Not really, since the twig that she plants
on her mothe grave grows into a tree that takes care of her, just as her
mother promised to do. The mother, then, is figured in the hazel tree and
in the birds that live in its branches. Early in the story, the tree offers solace
to the grieving girl; later, it gives her the dresses she needs to attend the
ball. Likewise, the two pigeons who live in the tree expose the false brides
as they ride away, with bleeding feet, on the princ horse, and they lead
the flock of birds who help Cinderella sort the lentils that the stepmother
throws on the hearth. In addition, the fleeing Cinderella is sa.id to find
safety in a dovecote and a pear tree ("a beautiful tall tree covered with the
most wonderful pears"). Since these places of refuge continue the bird / tree
symbolism, it is quite possible that we are meant to see the mothe influence
also at work in the rather mysterious way that Cinderella manages
to avoid too-early detection. Thus, at every turn in the narrative, the magical
power of the mother vies with the forces arrayed against Cinderella,
whether they be the selfish designs of the stepmother and stepsisters or
the futile attempts of the father and prince to capture and identify her. In
the end, the mother, despite death, reigns supreme. Not only does she take
her revenge on her daughter’s enemies by plucking out the eyes of the
stepsisters, but, more importantly, she succeeds in bringing about her
daughte advantageous marriage. The happy ending proves that it is
the mother, after all, who has been the power of the story. Cinderell success
resides in the fact that, while apparently motherless, she is in fact
well-mothered. In spite of death, the mother / daughter dyad has kept its
bonds intact. At its most basic level, the story is about this mother / daughter
relationship. It is about the daughter’s loyalty to the (good) mothe
words and the mothe continuing, magical influence in the (good)
daughter’s life.
Unlike the narratives favored by psychoanalysis, which are about
maternal absence and disempowerment, this tale tells a story about a
strong mother/daughter relationship that actively shapes events.
Cinderella’s mother performs a specific social function vis-a-vis her
daughter-she assists in her coming out. Her gifts are directed toward a
specific goal-to help Cinderella into an advantageous marriage. From
this perspective, what is most interesting about Cinderella’s mother is her
similarity to the stepmother. These two women share the same devotion
to their daughters and the same long-term goals: each mother wants to
ensure a future of power and prestige for her daughter, and each is willing 
to resort to extreme measures to achieve her aim. Thus, Cinderella’s
mother is a paradoxical figure: while her power is associated at the outset
with the power of the Christian god and while she seems to instruct
Cinderella in the value of long-suffering self-sacrifice, she is also a wily
competitor. She plots and schemes, and she wins. She beats the step-
mother at the game of marrying off daughters. She does for Cinderella
exactly what the wicked stepmother wishes to do for her own daughters
she gets her married to the "right" man.
4   Considering the similarities in their goals and strategies, the idea that
Cinderella and her mother are morally superior to the stepsisters and
their mother is shot through with contradictions. Throughout the tale,
there exists a structural tension between the character that is drawn thematically 
(the pious Cinderella) and the character that acts in the narrative 
(the shrewd, competitive Cinderella). The superficial moral of the
story would have us believe that Cinderell triumph at the ball is a
reward for her long-suffering patience. But while Cinderell piety does
play an important role in the forging of her supernatural alliance, it plays
almost no role in the important practical business of seducing the prince,
Indeed, the battle for the princ attention is not waged at the level of
character at all but at the level of clothes. Cinderella wins the battle
because her mother is able, through magic, to provide raiment so stunning 
that no ordinary dress can compete. Cinderell triumph at the b oll
has less to do with her innate goodness and more to do with her loya I L
to the dead mother and a string of subversive acts: she disobeys the st f.
mother, enlists forb idden helpers, uses magic powers, lies, hides, d i,
sembles, disguises herself, and evades pursuit. The brutal endingainderell goodness and the actual plot, so there is a tension between plol
and the alleged theme of romantic love. I say "alleged" here beca LI I-\(lthough modern readers and critics have sought to enshrine romantic lovI I
as a central value of the tale, there is actually nothing in the text itself to sliA
gest either that Cinderella loves the prince or that the prince loves her. Ti l marries Cinderella because he is enchanted (literally) by the s i.g hl
of her in her magical clothes. What is interesting about these clothes, at I 
HI
in the Grimdden beauty, they actually create it. In the Grimcribed as "deformed," while the sisters are described as "fair," so we can
only conclude that the power of Cinderell clothes is indeed miraculous
since they turn a deformed girl into a woman whose beauty surpasses that
of the already fair. Thus, the princ choice of Cinderella can be explained

neither by her piety, which he has never experienced, nor by her own
beauty, which does not exist. It is the mothe magic which brings about
the desired outcome, an outcome in which the prince has actually very little
choice. The princ oft-repeated statement, "Sh my partner," as well as
his obsessive tracking down of the true bride, suggests that he is operating
under a charm rather than as an autonomous character, and the fact that
both these motifs are repeated three times is further evidence that magic,
not free choice, is at work here.
6 This is not surprising: the enchantment of a potential marriage partner
is one of the most common motifs in fairy tales and mythology. The motif
of an enchanted or somehow disguised bride or bridegroom usually
appears in tales that depict some kind of unusual marriage, either the marriage
of a god or demon to a human (Cupid and Psyche) or the marriage
of a poor or ordinary mortal to a member of the deity or the nobility
(Beauty and the Beast). The idea, of course, is that one member, by being
disguised or by disguising another, can enter into a marriage that he or she
would not normally enter into, usually one that crosses class lines. Thus,
the enchantment of a prospective bride or bridegroom has more to do with
power and manipulation than it does with romance or affection. Rather
than talking about Cinderell love for the prince, then, it is more accurate
to say that Cinderella, in alliance with her mother, bewitches the prince in
order to gain the power and prestige that will accrue to her upon her marriage
to a member of the nobility.
